Trade  regime  facilitating  and  promoting  international  transactions  is  only  one  of  many ingredients that are indispensable to put a country on the path of sustainable economic growth. Without effective political system, fully liberalized prices, environment friendly to private business and  investment, macroeconomic stability, even  the best trade  regime will fail  to trigger supply response and accomplish this objective.  Yet,  this  should  not  suggest  that  reforming  foreign  trade  regime  could  wait  till  other components are in place. To the contrary, unreformed trade institutions could perpetuate or lead to the  emergence  of  huge  rent-seeking  opportunities  and  opposition  to  reforms.  These  groups blocked reforms in many transition  economies.  Coalition Provisional  Authority (CPA) has partly preempted this possibility. CPA Order 12 suspended tariffs and other border charges until January 1, 2004, and CPA Order 38, while de facto introducing an equivalent of a uniform tariff schedule in disguise, has prolonged a transparent and simple trade regime for another two years.  Measures adopted by CPA in late September 2003 suggest CPA’s commitment to follow the radical approach to economic reforms, as opposed to gradualism advocated by many international advisors. Three  most recent acts of  the CPA  establishing liberal  regimes of  taxation, banking, foreign investment and foreign  trade have closed various loopholes  and promise to expose the Iraqi  economy  to  competition  from  imports  and  foreign  investors.2  This  happened  despite opposition from some on the Iraqi Governing Council (IGC) as well as within CPA. A commentary published two weeks before CPA issued ‘reform orders’ by Oxford Analytica (October 6, 2003) had a telling title “IRAQ: Rapid economic opening may be scaled back.”  The  Iraqi  reform  package,  announced  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the  World  Bank  and International Monetary Fund in Dubai, has already come under attack. It has been dubbed neo-conservative,  extreme,  etc.  New  York  Times’  reporter  Jeff  Maddrick  (2003) observes  that  by mainstream economist’s standards  introduced measures are extreme and “in fact stunning,”  He writes:  “The  current  plan  is  supported  neither  by  theory  nor  experience,  only  by  the  wishful ideological thinking of its advocates. Its consequences, as in Russia, could be widespread cruelty.” This observation misses the point completely, as Russia neither adopted radical shock nor opened its economy to external competition. Russia’s fatal experience was not with swift liberalization, as, for instance, Dabrowski and Antczak (1996) have convincingly shown. To the contrary, exclusion of oil,  non-ferrous and  other easily  marketable raw  materials  from price  liberalization fueled  ren
